https://ballsandstrikes.org/scotus/wooden-v-united-states/ i really like this article, for a lot of reasons

> zeroing in on the definition of a single term is also a tool of convenience for the Court, because it perpetuates the fantasy of a functional system—of pretending that the arbitrariness in the criminal legal process can be rooted out through honing in on the correct legislative term. This obscures the rot at the core of a system that is almost as inconsistent as it is cruel.

that's the thesis of the piece

and it was sparked by the recent SCOTUS oral argument in wooden v. US (you can find it on supremecourt.gov), which was a messy and tangled string of ridiculous hypotheticals (the article mentions some of them -- a multitasking crime boss, a criminal knocking down 10 successive walls going through a series of apartments, whether using two guns to shoot two people simultanouesly is different from using one gun to shoot two people in succession) -- and I couldn't help but think, "here's a man, whose about to be sentenced to prison for 15 years, and the next 15 years of his life depend on whether a random group of 9 lawyers feel about multi-tasking crime bosses
and I like where this article takes it -- in many ways, with regards to statutory interpretation for the past 30 years, the conservative, originalist line has reigned supreme. certainly, that's in no small part due to scalia being so charismatic as a speaker, and the federalist society and other similar organizations disseminating the information, but also partially because the liberal arguments were often just fundamentally unconvincing. look up a conversation between RBG and Scalia, or even an internet disagreement about constitutional interpretation, and you'll notice that often, it feels like the conservative is making a principled, hard-line, anti-government, consistent argument, while the liberal can at best muster a vague sense of "oh but the constitution needs to change and evolve with the times" -- and obviously, that's ridiculous. scalia's unitary executive theory is as pro-government as possible. but I like the way this article makes an affirmative argument for purposivism (the idea that we need to look at the purpose and intentions of laws), or even just straight up judicial activism (that judges should prioritize morality, and "let the law catch up") -- originalist and textualist arguments are absurd in any real situation. why tf does what some random commentators in 1867 wrote about the due process clause change whether a person today had their rights violated or not? why do we spend an hour arguing about the definition of the word occasion, or whether a comma makes a particular phrase apply to both clauses or just one -- when someone's life is at stake?
