Rito's Calc textbook Reviews

the absolute stock-standard textbook that nearly all calculus courses across the country use is stewart's calculus. i found that the best place to look to evaluate a textbook is (a) fundamental theorem of calculus, (b) integrals/derivatives of exponentials and logs, and (c) how it explains partial fraction decomposition. stewart does a fairly good job with the fundamental theorem of calculus, sensibly introducing the idea of area first, and then introducing the actual theorem with good intuition and lots of examples. it does something kinda weird with logs and exponentials -- it does an informal explanation of them in the derivative chapter, then says "ok we're going to ignore everything we did before and start from scratch" for the formal explanation in a later chapter, and doesn't really do a very good job of explaining why. the partial fractions explanation was probably the best of any of the textbooks i reviewed. the big criticism i have of this book is that, calc 1, as a whole, occupies a really weird place in math education, cause its the first class that's even sorta rigorous, but they can't be too rigorous, so there's a couple of points in the book where its like "welp we're gonna make stuff look rigorous but under the hood we're actually hand-waving away some stuff", namely, the definition of an integral in a lot of calculus textbooks is kinda sus. finally, stewart has these giant pages of exercises at the end of each module, just like 100-150 exercises, the first 80-90 of which are just awful computer generated busywork. unfortunately, that computer generated busywork is all that most teachers ever assign, which sucks. don't worry, the rest of the reviews should be shorter LMAO


i looked at two different editions of larson calculus, which is the one fanning  uses. i wouldn't have known about this textbook unless fanning used it, its seems virtually irrelevant. this textbook is very obviously trying to copy stewart -- it has the same style, almost module structure, same computer-generated busywork exercises. except, its worse in every way. the explanation of the FTC is absolute dogshit, it doesn't give any motivation or intuition whatsoever, instead there's some handwavy confusing bullshit about how slope is y/x and area is y * x, and the proof it gives is so obtuse that it took me multiple days to even figure out what it was valid, and even longer to get why it was elegant. the explanation of exponentials/logs is absolutely awful, it literally has no motivation whatsoever, the first line in the chapter is "the natural log function is defined as the integral of 1/t dt from 1 to x" with no motivation or intuition or explanation or anything. i didn't even bother looking at the explanation of partial fractions. i'm also rather annoyed that this book writes every integral/derivative formula with chain rule, which confuses students. the statement "the integral of e^u du = e^u + C" and "the integral of e^x dx = e^x + C" are equivalent, but this book treats them like they're different. the two different editions i reviewed are more or less identical, though the color scheme of the 10th edition is slightly better, but the 10th edition lacks the appendix that would contain the proof of a whole bunch of important formulas.


Spivak calculus, is my absolute favorite calculus textbook of all time, and it seems i'm not alone in that -- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=huSD6GysL6k, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oave4Z939as. This book is super rigorous, super formal. Its a bit terse at times -- I found the explanation of partial fractions too hard to follow, it just did too much algebra too quickly, but at other times, it's really well written. When its necessary, Spivak includes really long, really beautifully written explantions, like in the exponentials section, it spends a whole 2 pages of just beautifully written prose explaining why its doing what its doing. Its a rigorous math book, so every theorem is proven, and the proofs are understandable (unlike certain other books. I'm not salty), but a lot of stuff is left as an exercise to the reader. Other books have a whole chapter on arc length and polar coordinates and stuff, this book just leaves it all as an exercise. That's a lot of fun for someone like me, who enjoys proving things, but that's essentially why its not used as a standard book. There's also a couple of really interesting chapters on topics not normally included in math textbooks, like kepler's laws, why pi is irrational, why e is trancendental, and more. The only other thing I have to say against Spivak is that the explanation of taylor series is a bit too concise to follow, and doesn't really fit in neatly with the way "standard" calculus is taught. like its technically valid to define taylor polynomials before you define sequences and series, but its a bit unintuitive unless you already know what taylor polynomials are. I'd recommend 3b1b's video on taylor polynomials Just in general, really love this book. Super challenging exercises, super well written explanations, wonderful rigorous definitions.


damn my promise of them getting shorter doesn't seem to be working
the last two I haven't read as thoroughly though, I mostly just skimmed them


Boelkin's Active Calculus is in some ways the polar opposite of Spivak. It's an ebook, available online as an "interactive" textbook (https://activecalculus.org/), but you can also download PDFs. It is not rigorous at all, there are virtually no definitions, theorems are not rigorously proven. Instead, the focus is on building intuition with practical examples, and I think it does a really good job of that. I'm not a teacher, so I really no have no idea how well this would work, but it looks really frickin cool, cause it sorta walks you through the process of discovering each result yourself with examples and activities.


Finally, Apostol's Calculus is a really interesting book. It was written by a caltech professor, and is super influential. The big thing that sets this book apart is that it does integrals first, before derivatives or limits. That's technically fine, there's no reason why the definition of limits requires limits or derivatives, and it does a surprisingly good job starting with step functions, defining integrals on step functions, then showing how step functions can approximate any function. This book, like Spivak's, tries to be super rigorous, but unlike Spivak, there is a focus on practical applications as well (especially in the differential equations chapter. Spivak doesn't have a differential equations chapter at all, it assumes you'll be able to figure them out). The prose isn't quite as smooth as Spivak's, and the exercises don't seem quite as interesting, but its kinda a curous book, because it goes in a weird order.


ok since i've already written several walls of text, i may as well include an honorable mention
so, the honorable mention is David Griffith's "Introduction to Electrodynamics", this is a physics textbook for E&M, and its my absolute favorite textbook that I've ever read, for any subject, ever. Its just a spectacular book, wonderful explanations, just concise enough to be enjoyable, just long enough to make things clear, the exercises are just challenging enough to test your knowledge, but not so hard that you'll be stuck on them. This is the only textbook that I've read entirely for fun, the same way you'd read a novel, cause the writing is just that damn good. But the reason it gets an honorable mention is cause the first chapter of Grifiths E&M is a super comprehensive and well written introduction to multivariable calculus, as good as any regular multivar book. It doesn't prove or define things super rigorously, but the ideas are intuitive enough that that's not really necessary, and this book does a really good job of making it intuitive and simple and easy to udnerstand
